modify README for v4 genomes HT annnotations (#1177)
broadinstitute/gnomad-browser: browser/help/topics/v3-ht-annotations.md

---

> id: v3-ht-annotations

Reviewer: not sure if this needs to be renamed (this is is a question for someone on the browser team)

title: 'gnomAD v4 genomes Hail Table annotation descriptions'
---

> The gnomAD v3 Hail Table annotations are defined below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The gnomAD v4 genomes Hail Table annotations are defined below:
```

Reviewer: unless we're planning to use the same help page for both exomes and genomes

- **freq_index_dict**: Dictionary keyed by specified label grouping combinations (group: adj/raw, pop: gnomAD inferred global population, sex: sex karyotype), with values describing the corresponding index of each grouping entry in the ‘freq’ array row annotation.
- **faf_index_dict**: Dictionary keyed by specified label grouping combinations (group: adj/raw, pop: gnomAD inferred global population, sex: sex karyotype), with values describing the corresponding index of each grouping entry in the filtering allele frequency (‘faf’) row annotation.
- **faf_meta**: Filtering allele frequency metadata. An ordered list containing the frequency aggregation group for each element of the ‘faf’ array row annotation.

> - **vep_globals**: Information about VEP annotations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **vep_globals**: Information about VEP annotations.
```
removed trailing whitespace

  - **vep_version**: VEP version that was run on the callset.
  - **vep_csq_header**: VEP header for VCF export.
  - **vep_help**: Output from vep --help.

>   - **vep_config**: VEP configuration to run VEP with [Hail](https://hail.is/docs/0.2/methods/genetics.html#hail.methods.vep) by implementing changes in different VEP versions. File created using command within VEP init shell script in https://github.com/broadinstitute/gnomad_methods/tree/main.

Reviewer: > by implementing changes in different VEP versions

this is a little unclear, could you expand on this?

Author: I wanted to say that Hail integrated VEP95, which didn't have some new data inside, for example, MANE Select, etc. How should we phrase, so the config file is not the same as the default Hail vep.

Reviewer: it should be fine to just reword to this, then:
Vep configuration to run this version of VEP with [Hail](https://hail.is/docs/0.2/methods/genetics.html#hail.methods.vep). File created using command within VEP init shell script in https://github.com/broadinstitute/gnomad_methods/tree/main.

- **freq_index_dict**: Dictionary keyed by specified label grouping combinations (group: adj/raw, pop: gnomAD inferred global population, sex: sex karyotype), with values describing the corresponding index of each grouping entry in the ‘freq’ array row annotation.
- **faf_index_dict**: Dictionary keyed by specified label grouping combinations (group: adj/raw, pop: gnomAD inferred global population, sex: sex karyotype), with values describing the corresponding index of each grouping entry in the filtering allele frequency (‘faf’) row annotation.
- **faf_meta**: Filtering allele frequency metadata. An ordered list containing the frequency aggregation group for each element of the ‘faf’ array row annotation.

> - **vep_globals**: VEP globals that were recorded during VEP annotation.

Reviewer: what about "Information about VEP annotations"?

Reviewer 2: I like KCs description

  - **vep_version**: VEP version that was run on the callset.
  - **vep_csq_header**: VEP header for VCF export.

>   - **vep_help**: VEP help?

Reviewer: what about "Output from `vep --help`"?

>   - **vep_config**: VEP configuration to run VEP with Hail.

Author: maybe we should put this: https://github.com/broadinstitute/gnomad_methods/blob/a486dc3bf27e5a1a52e5819d474a1962b47d81ac/init_scripts/vep105-init.sh#L50

>   - **vep_config**: VEP configuration to run VEP with [Hail](https://hail.is/docs/0.2/methods/genetics.html#hail.methods.vep).

Reviewer: I'm not sure if we should add the direct link to the script here (responding to your comment0 given that our code may change after the v4 release (meaning the line number could point someone to the wrong location). maybe we should say something like "File created using command within VEP init shell script in https://github.com/broadinstitute/gnomad_methods/tree/main"

Author: yeah, sounds good to me, because it's slightly different from default Hail vep.

>   - **vep_config**: VEP configuration to run VEP with [Hail](https://hail.is/docs/0.2/methods/genetics.html#hail.methods.vep). File created using command within VEP init shell script in https://github.com/broadinstitute/gnomad_methods/tree/main.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **vep_config**: VEP configuration to run VEP version with [Hail](https://hail.is/docs/0.2/methods/genetics.html#hail.methods.vep). File created using command within VEP init shell script in https://github.com/broadinstitute/gnomad_methods/tree/main.
```
sorry, I missed a word

  - **bin_freq**: Bin frequencies for the age histogram. This is the number of records found in each bin.
  - **n_smaller**: Count of age values falling below lowest histogram bin edge.
  - **n_larger**: Count of age values falling above highest histogram bin edge.
- **freq_meta_sample_count**: A sample count per sample grouping defined in the 'freq_meta' global annotation.

> - **vrs_version**: The Variant Representation Specification ([VRS](https://vrs.ga4gh.org/en/stable/)) [version](https://github.com/ga4gh/vrs-python/tags) that was used to compute IDs on the callset.

Reviewer: we can remove the link to the vrs-python repo in this description now that it has been added below (in `vrs-python_version`. I also understand that the hyphen between "vrs" and "python" is following their convention, but maybe we should use only underscores here for consistency

>   - **vrs-python_version**: The [version] of the vrs-python library that was used to compute IDs on the callset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **vrs-python_version**: The [version](https://github.com/ga4gh/vrs-python/tags) of the vrs-python library that was used to compute IDs on the callset.
```
adding missing link

>   - **seqrepo_version**: The version of seqrepo database that was used in VRS computations.

Reviewer: should add a link to seqrepo here as well

> - **in_silico_predictor_versions**: Versions of in silico predictors used in the callset.

Reviewer: I also can't comment on the exact line, but let's update the VEP globals to also follow the schema here: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1mHfhDJyY22JTFWoMhqfrDAIeKikTxYBec11v7tOiQeo/edit.

the exomes also have a general README in their globals; we should add one here as well.

also, I realize these changes (VEP + general README) are out of the initial scope of the PR. how would you like to proceed?

> - **in_silico_predictor_versions**: Versions of in silico predictors used in the callset.

Author: I changed the title of the PR, to be more general.

  - **bin_freq**: Bin frequencies for the age histogram. This is the number of records found in each bin.
  - **n_smaller**: Count of age values falling below lowest histogram bin edge.
  - **n_larger**: Count of age values falling above highest histogram bin edge.
- **freq_meta_sample_count**: A sample count per sample grouping defined in the 'freq_meta' global annotation.

> - **vrs_version**: The Variant Representation Specification that was used to compute IDs on the callset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **vrs_version**: The Variant Representation Specification version that was used to compute IDs on the callset.
```

>   - **vrs-python_version**: The [version](https://github.com/ga4gh/vrs-python/tags) of the vrs-python library that was used to compute IDs on the callset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **vrs_python_version**: The [version](https://github.com/ga4gh/vrs-python/tags) of the vrs-python library that was used to compute IDs on the callset.
```
I know their tool is vrs-python, but keeping all of these as _ for consistency

  - **seqrepo_version**: The [version](https://github.com/biocommons/biocommons.seqrepo) of the SeqRepo database that was used in VRS computations.
- **tool_versions**: Versions of in silico predictors used in the callset.

>   - **dbsnp_version**: dbSNP version used in the callset.

Reviewer: minor note that we included the full names of revel, cadd, sift, and polyphen, so it might also make sense to expand dbsnp as well

Author: I actually saw you removed some full names. I don't think we need to get full name for dbSNP, because it's very common in the community.

Reviewer: it is common, but so is CADD, so maybe we should stop adding full names entirely or add full names to all.

also, I removed full names from the descriptions below because they are now spelled out here

  - **revel_version**: Rare Exome Variant Ensemble Learner (REVEL) version.
  - **primateai_3d_version**: PrimateAI-3D version.
  - **cadd_version**: Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion (CADD) version.
  - **sift_version**: Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant (SIFT) version.
  - **polyphen_version**: Polymorphism Phenotyping v2 (Polyphen-v2) version.
  - **phylop_version**: PhyloP version.
  - **splice_ai_version**: SpliceAI version.
  - **pangolin_version**: Pangolin version.

>   - **README**: Dictionary explaining the `freq_index_dict` and `freq_meta` global annotations.

Reviewer: this doesn't need to be nested (apologies if this is from my suggestion)

  - **bin_freq**: Bin frequencies for the age histogram. This is the number of records found in each bin.
  - **n_smaller**: Count of age values falling below lowest histogram bin edge.
  - **n_larger**: Count of age values falling above highest histogram bin edge.
- **freq_meta_sample_count**: A sample count per sample grouping defined in the 'freq_meta' global annotation.

> - **vrs_version**: The Variant Representation Specification version that was used to compute IDs on the callset.

Reviewer: minor note that plural (vrs_versions) is more consistent with `tool_versions` below (particularly given this has not just the VRS version but also the seqrepo version now)

  - **bin_freq**: Bin frequencies for the age histogram. This is the number of records found in each bin.
  - **n_smaller**: Count of age values falling below lowest histogram bin edge.
  - **n_larger**: Count of age values falling above highest histogram bin edge.
- **in_silico_predictors**
  - **revel**:
    - **revel_max**: dbNSFP's REVEL scores from 0 to 1 predicting the pathogenicity of missense variants. Variants with higher scores are predicted to be more likely to be deleterious. We take a max score for MANE Select transcripts if exists, otherwise we take a max score predicted for canonical transcripts.
  - **primateai_3d**:

>     - **primateai-3d_max**: Illumina’s PrimateAI-3D deleteriousness score from 0 (less deleterious) to 1 (more deleterious) of missense variants.

Author: No, it will be similar to what we do for REVEL. I changed it.

  - **cadd**:
    - **phred: CADD Phred-like scores ('scaled C-scores') ranging from 1 to 99, based on the rank of each variant relative to all possible 8.6 billion substitutions in the human reference genome. Larger values are more deleterious.
    - **raw_score**: Raw CADD scores are interpretable as the extent to which the annotation profile for a given variant suggests that the variant is likely to be 'observed' (negative values) vs 'simulated' (positive values). Larger values are more deleterious.
  - **sift**:
    - **sift_max**: A normalized probability of observing the new amino acid at that position to affect protein function, and ranges from 0 to 1. Similar to what we did for REVEL and PrimateAI-3D, we will only show max scores from MANE Select and Canonical transcripts. 
  - **polyphen**:
    - **polyphen_max: Prediction of the possible impact of an amino acid substitution on the structure and function of a human protein, ranging from 0.0 (tolerated) to 1.0 (deleterious). We also only show predictions of a max score from MANE Select and canonical transcripts. 

>   - **phylop**:

Author: Oh, it's a hidden link, so it won't matter that much, but maybe all articles, instead of github etc?

>   - **phylop**:

Author: I changed most of them to articles.

>   - **phylop**:

Reviewer: great, thanks!

    - **phylop**: Base-wise conservation of Zoonomia 241 placental mammals, ranging from -20 to 9.28, phyloP can measure acceleration (faster evolution than expected under neutral drift, assigned negative scores) as well as conservation (slower than expected evolution, assigned positive scores). 
  - **splice_ai**:

>     - **max_ds**: The maximum delta score across 4 splicing consequences across genes if a variant was predicted on multiple genes, interpreted as the probability of the variant being splice-altering. Ranging from 0 to 1, delta score > 0.2 has been used as a permissive threshold for retaining high sensitivity. 

Author: You mean this one: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9912651/? I also saw the mentioned permission threshold in the SpliceAI paper.

>     - **max_ds**: The maximum delta score across 4 splicing consequences across genes if a variant was predicted on multiple genes, interpreted as the probability of the variant being splice-altering. Ranging from 0 to 1, delta score > 0.2 has been used as a permissive threshold for retaining high sensitivity. 

Author: I copied the floating text from the SpliceAI lookup.

>     - **max_ds**: The maximum delta score across 4 splicing consequences across genes if a variant was predicted on multiple genes, interpreted as the probability of the variant being splice-altering. Ranging from 0 to 1, delta score > 0.2 has been used as a permissive threshold for retaining high sensitivity. 

Reviewer: ah no, this paper https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37352859/

  - **pangolin**:

>     - **largest_ds**: The largest delta score of a variant involved in 2 splicing consequences across genes if a variant was predicted on multiple genes. It ranges from -1 to 1, positive are for splice loss variants and > 0 are for splice-gain variants. Pangolin also proposed a cutoff of >|0.2| for the predicted increase or decrease in splice site usage. 

Author: Is it more clear this way?

>     - **largest_ds**: The largest delta score of a variant involved in 2 splicing consequences across genes if a variant was predicted on multiple genes. It ranges from -1 to 1, positive are for splice loss variants and > 0 are for splice-gain variants. Pangolin also proposed a cutoff of >|0.2| for the predicted increase or decrease in splice site usage. 

Reviewer: we should still add something about the scores here, I just thought the original text was confusing (positive scores were for splice loss variants, but scores > 0 were for splice gain?)

  - **bin_freq**: Bin frequencies for the age histogram. This is the number of records found in each bin.
  - **n_smaller**: Count of age values falling below lowest histogram bin edge.
  - **n_larger**: Count of age values falling above highest histogram bin edge.
- **in_silico_predictors**: Variant prediction annotations. Struct contains prediction scores from multiple in silico predictors for variants that are predicted to be missense, impacting protein function, evolutionarily conserved, or splice-altering. We chose scores for either MANE Select or canonical transcripts if a prediction score was available for multiple transcripts.

>   - **revel**: Rare Exome Variant Ensemble Learner (REVEL) [score](https://sites.google.com/site/revelgenomics/about). An ensemble score for predicting the pathogenicity of missense variants (based on 13 other variant predictors).

Reviewer: why not cite the journal article for REVEL here (for consistency)?

>     - **revel**: Rare Exome Variant Ensemble Learner (REVEL) [score](https://sites.google.com/site/revelgenomics/about). An ensemble score for predicting the pathogenicity of missense variants (based on 13 other variant predictors).

Reviewer: wait, it looks like something went awry here. the line with `revel_max` no longer exists here?

> - **in_silico_predictors**: Variant prediction annotations. We put together the prediction scores from multiple in silico predictors for variants that are predicted to be missense, impacting protein function, evolutionarily conserved or splice-altering. We focus on MANE Select and canonical transcripts if the prediction scores are available for multiple transcripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **in_silico_predictors**: Variant prediction annotations. Struct contains prediction scores from multiple in silico predictors for variants that are predicted to be missense, impacting protein function, evolutionarily conserved, or splice-altering. We chose scores for either MANE Select or canonical transcripts if a prediction score was available for multiple transcripts.
```

>   - **revel**: Rare Exome Variant Ensemble Learner (REVEL) [score](https://sites.google.com/site/revelgenomics/about). An ensemble score for predicting the pathogenicity of missense variants (based on 13 other variant predictors).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **revel**: Rare Exome Variant Ensemble Learner (REVEL) [score](https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(16)30370-6). An ensemble score for predicting the pathogenicity of missense variants (based on 13 other variant predictors).
```

>   - **primateai_3d**: A deep neural network-trained [score](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abn8197) for classifying pathogenicity of missense variants.

Reviewer: we also don't know if we'll have this score for v4 MVP yet

Author: Hopefully we will, we should hear from them next week or so.

Reviewer: leaving this comment open in case we need to remove this section

    - **primateai-3d_max**: Score ranging from 0 to 1 predicting the deleteriousness of missense variants. Higher scores indicate a variant is more likely to be deleterious. We prioritize max scores for MANE Select transcripts where possible and otherwise report a score for the canonical transcript. 

>   - **cadd**: Combined Annotation Dependent Deletion [score](https://cadd.gs.washington.edu/) used to predict deleteriousness of SNVs and indels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **cadd**: Combined Annotation Dependent Deletion [score](https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/47/D1/D886/5146191) used to predict deleteriousness of SNVs and indels.
```

    - **phred**: CADD Phred-like scaled C-scores ranging from 1 to 99 based on the rank of each variant relative to all possible 8.6 billion substitutions in the human reference genome. Larger values indicate increased predicted deleteriousness.
    - **raw_score**: Unscaled CADD scores indicating whether a variant is likely to be "observed" (negative values) vs "simulated" (positive values). Larger values indicate increased predicted deleteriousness.
  - **sift**: Sorting Tolerant From Intolerant (SIFT) [score](https://www.nature.com/articles/nprot.2009.86) used to predict the impact of SNVs on protein function.

>     - **sift_max**: Scaled probability of the amino acid substitution being tolerated, ranging from 0 to 1. Scores below 0.05 are predicted to impact protein function.  A normalized probability of observing the new amino acid at that position to affect protein function, and ranges from 0 to 1. We prioritize max scores for MANE Select transcripts where possible and otherwise report a score for the canonical transcript. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **sift_max**: Scaled probability of the amino acid substitution being tolerated, ranging from 0 to 1. Scores below 0.05 are predicted to impact protein function. We prioritize max scores for MANE Select transcripts where possible and otherwise report a score for the canonical transcript. 
```

>   - **polyphen**: Polymorphism Phenotyping v2 (Polyphen-v2 [score](https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth0410-248)) that predicts the impact of an SNV on protein structure and function.

Reviewer: whoops, sorry
```suggestion
  - **polyphen**: Polymorphism Phenotyping v2 (Polyphen-v2) [score](https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth0410-248) that predicts the impact of an SNV on protein structure and function.
```

>     - **polyphen_max**: Prediction of the possible impact of an amino acid substitution on the structure and function of a human protein, ranging from 0.0 (tolerated) to 1.0 (deleterious).  We prioritize max scores for MANE Select transcripts where possible and otherwise report a score for the canonical transcript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **polyphen_max**: Prediction of the possible impact of an amino acid substitution on the structure and function of a human protein, ranging from 0.0 (tolerated) to 1.0 (deleterious). We prioritize max scores for MANE Select transcripts where possible and otherwise report a score for the canonical transcript.
```

>   - **phylop**:Per-base evolutionary constraint (score)[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37104612/].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **phylop**: Per-base evolutionary constraint (score)[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37104612/].
```

    - **phylop**: Base-wise conservation across the 241 placental mammals in the [Zoonomia](https://zoonomiaproject.org/) project. Score ranges from -20 to 9.28, and reflects acceleration (faster evolution than expected under neutral drift, assigned negative scores) as well as conservation (slower than expected evolution, assigned positive scores). 
  - **splice_ai**: [Score](https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0092-8674(18)31629-5) that predicts a variant's impact on splicing.
    - **max_ds**: The maximum delta score across 4 splicing consequences, which reflects the probability of the variant being splice-altering. If a variant was predicted to fall within multiple genes, score is across all relevant genes. Score ranges from 0 to 1. In the SpliceAI paper, a detailed characterization of the delta scores is provided for 0.2 (high recall), 0.5 (recommended), and 0.8 (high precision) cutoffs. 

>   - **pangolin**: [Score](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-022-02664-4) predicting a variant's impact on splicing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **pangolin**: [Score](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-022-02664-4) that predicts a variant's impact on splicing.
```
might as well make the text consistent between this and spliceAI (since this is such a generic description)

>     - **largest_ds**: The largest delta score of a variant involved in 2 splicing consequences. If a variant is predicted to fall within multiple genes, score is across all relevant genes. Different from SpliceAI, in Pangolin splice gain is noted as the increase in splice usage (scores range from 0 to 1) and splice loss as the decrease in splice usage (scores range from 0 to -1). The Pangolin authors proposed a cutoff of >|0.2| for the predicted increase or decrease in splice site usage. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **largest_ds**: The largest delta score of a variant involved in 2 splicing consequences. If a variant is predicted to fall within multiple genes, score is across all relevant genes. Note that there is different behavior from spliceAI: splice gain is noted as the increase in splice usage (scores range from 0 to 1) and splice loss as the decrease in splice usage (scores range from 0 to -1). The Pangolin authors proposed a cutoff of >|0.2| for the predicted increase or decrease in splice site usage. 
```

  - **bin_freq**: Bin frequencies for the age histogram. This is the number of records found in each bin.
  - **n_smaller**: Count of age values falling below lowest histogram bin edge.
  - **n_larger**: Count of age values falling above highest histogram bin edge.
- **in_silico_predictors**: Variant prediction annotations. Struct contains prediction scores from multiple in silico predictors for variants that are predicted to be missense, impacting protein function, evolutionarily conserved, or splice-altering. We chose scores for either MANE Select or canonical transcripts if a prediction score was available for multiple transcripts.

>   - **revel_max**: Rare Exome Variant Ensemble Learner (REVEL) [score](https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(16)30370-6). An ensemble score for predicting the pathogenicity of missense variants (based on 13 other variant predictors). Score predicting the pathogenicity of missense variants with a range of 0 to 1. Variants with higher scores are predicted to be more likely to be deleterious. We prioritize max scores for MANE Select transcripts where possible and otherwise report a score for the canonical transcript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **revel_max**: An ensemble [score](https://www.cell.com/ajhg/fulltext/S0002-9297(16)30370-6) for predicting the pathogenicity of missense variants (based on 13 other variant predictors). Score ranges from 0 to 1, and larger values are predicted to be more likely to be deleterious. We prioritize max scores for MANE Select transcripts where possible and otherwise report a score for the canonical transcript.
```

>   - **primateai3d_max**: A deep neural network-trained [score](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abn8197) for classifying pathogenicity of missense variants. Score ranging from 0 to 1 predicting the deleteriousness of missense variants. Higher scores indicate a variant is more likely to be deleterious. We prioritize max scores for MANE Select transcripts where possible and otherwise report a score for the canonical transcript. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **primateai3d_max**: A deep neural network-trained [score](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abn8197) for classifying the pathogenicity of missense variants. Score ranges from 0 to 1, and larger values indicate a variant is more likely to be deleterious. We prioritize max scores for MANE Select transcripts where possible and otherwise report a score for the canonical transcript. 
```

>   - **cadd**: Combined Annotation Dependent Deletion [score](https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/47/D1/D886/5146191) used to predict deleteriousness of SNVs and indels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **cadd**: [Score](https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/47/D1/D886/5146191) used to predict deleteriousness of SNVs and indels.
```

    - **phred**: CADD Phred-like scaled C-scores ranging from 1 to 99 based on the rank of each variant relative to all possible 8.6 billion substitutions in the human reference genome. Larger values indicate increased predicted deleteriousness.
    - **raw_score**: Unscaled CADD scores indicating whether a variant is likely to be "observed" (negative values) vs "simulated" (positive values). Larger values indicate increased predicted deleteriousness.

>   - **sift_max**: Sorting Tolerant From Intolerant (SIFT) [score](https://www.nature.com/articles/nprot.2009.86) used to predict the impact of SNVs on protein function. Scaled probability of the amino acid substitution being tolerated, ranging from 0 to 1. Scores below 0.05 are predicted to impact protein function. We prioritize max scores for MANE Select transcripts where possible and otherwise report a score for the canonical transcript. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **sift_max**: [Score](https://www.nature.com/articles/nprot.2009.86) reflecting the scaled probability of the amino acid substitution being tolerated, ranging from 0 to 1. Scores below 0.05 are predicted to impact protein function. We prioritize max scores for MANE Select transcripts where possible and otherwise report a score for the canonical transcript. 
```

>   - **polyphen_max**: Polymorphism Phenotyping v2 (Polyphen-v2) [score](https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth0410-248) that predicts the impact of an SNV on protein structure and function. Prediction of the possible impact of an amino acid substitution on the structure and function of a human protein, ranging from 0.0 (tolerated) to 1.0 (deleterious).  We prioritize max scores for MANE Select transcripts where possible and otherwise report a score for the canonical transcript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **polyphen_max**: [Score](https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth0410-248) that predicts the possible impact of an amino acid substitution on the structure and function of a human protein, ranging from 0.0 (tolerated) to 1.0 (deleterious).  We prioritize max scores for MANE Select transcripts where possible and otherwise report a score for the canonical transcript.
```

>   - **phylop**: Per-base evolutionary constraint (score)[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37104612/]. Base-wise conservation across the 241 placental mammals in the [Zoonomia](https://zoonomiaproject.org/) project. Score ranges from -20 to 9.28, and reflects acceleration (faster evolution than expected under neutral drift, assigned negative scores) as well as conservation (slower than expected evolution, assigned positive scores). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **phylop**: Base-wise conservation (score)[https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37104612/] across the 241 placental mammals in the [Zoonomia](https://zoonomiaproject.org/) project. Score ranges from -20 to 9.28, and reflects acceleration (faster evolution than expected under neutral drift, assigned negative scores) as well as conservation (slower than expected evolution, assigned positive scores). 
```

>   - **spliceai_max_ds**: [Score](https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0092-8674(18)31629-5) that predicts a variant's impact on splicing.The maximum delta score across 4 splicing consequences, which reflects the probability of the variant being splice-altering. If a variant was predicted to fall within multiple genes, score is across all relevant genes. Score ranges from 0 to 1. In the SpliceAI paper, a detailed characterization of the delta scores is provided for 0.2 (high recall), 0.5 (recommended), and 0.8 (high precision) cutoffs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **spliceai_max_ds**: Maximum delta [score](https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0092-8674(18)31629-5) across 4 splicing consequences, which reflects the probability of the variant being splice-altering. If a variant was predicted to fall within multiple genes, score is across all relevant genes. Score ranges from 0 to 1. In the SpliceAI paper, a detailed characterization of the delta scores is provided for 0.2 (high recall), 0.5 (recommended), and 0.8 (high precision) cutoffs. 
```

>   - **pangolin_largest_ds**: [Score](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-022-02664-4) that predicts a variant's impact on splicing. The largest delta score of a variant involved in 2 splicing consequences. If a variant is predicted to fall within multiple genes, score is across all relevant genes. Note that there is different behavior from spliceAI: splice gain is noted as the increase in splice usage (scores range from 0 to 1) and splice loss as the decrease in splice usage (scores range from 0 to -1). The Pangolin authors proposed a cutoff of >|0.2| for the predicted increase or decrease in splice site usage. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **pangolin_largest_ds**: Largest delta [score](https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13059-022-02664-4) across 2 splicing consequences, which reflects the probability of the variant being splice-altering. If a variant is predicted to fall within multiple genes, score is across all relevant genes. Note that there is different behavior from spliceAI: splice gain is noted as the increase in splice usage (scores range from 0 to 1) and splice loss as the decrease in splice usage (scores range from 0 to -1). The Pangolin authors proposed a cutoff of >|0.2| for the predicted increase or decrease in splice site usage. 
```

  - **primateai_3d**: A deep neural network-trained [score](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.abn8197) for classifying pathogenicity of missense variants.
    - **primateai-3d_max**: Score ranging from 0 to 1 predicting the deleteriousness of missense variants. Higher scores indicate a variant is more likely to be deleterious. We prioritize max scores for MANE Select transcripts where possible and otherwise report a score for the canonical transcript. 
  - **cadd**: Combined Annotation Dependent Deletion [score](https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/47/D1/D886/5146191) used to predict deleteriousness of SNVs and indels.
    - **phred**: CADD Phred-like scaled C-scores ranging from 1 to 99 based on the rank of each variant relative to all possible 8.6 billion substitutions in the human reference genome. Larger values indicate increased predicted deleteriousness.
    - **raw_score**: Unscaled CADD scores indicating whether a variant is likely to be "observed" (negative values) vs "simulated" (positive values). Larger values indicate increased predicted deleteriousness.

>   - **sift**: Sorting Tolerant From Intolerant (SIFT) [score](https://www.nature.com/articles/nprot.2009.86) used to predict the impact of SNVs on protein function.

Reviewer: looking at this again, none of the in silico scores really need to have additional nesting if they only contain a single score, right? for example, why not have REVEL_max as a top level annotation within the in silico predictors struct?

Author: It's because of CADD, we're still keeping two scores. I only to keep each score in its own struct.

Author: You want to make something like cadd_phred, cadd_raw_score, so every score can be under insico_predictors?

Reviewer: no, I meant, for the scores that only have one value, why not do:
in silico struct
    - revel max
    - primateAI 3D max
    - CADD
        - raw
        - phred
    - phyloP
    - etc
?

Author: We could, it just the way we process each score, we put each in a struct.

Reviewer: I will defer to @mike-w-wilson's opinion then (since he has been reviewing those PRs)

Author: Historically, I also had other items under each predictor.

Reviewer: yeah, it makes sense to have an entire struct for each predictor if there were multiple fields, but it seems a little unnecessary to now nest the scores if there is only one score for most predictors. I agree CADD should still have a struct

Author: I will wait for Mike's opinion if we should change all of them to non-nested in the processing.

Author: so far, only CADD and REVEL have been run.

Author: I removed the struct for other predictors.
